01

Executive
Summary

5

Data Center Report (2026)

Executive
Summary
This report accompanies the IDCA Digital Economy Report 2026, which was released in January 2026.
The previous report focused on the global buildout of the Digital Economy, with an analysis of all aspects
of digital infrastructure and its impact on societal prosperity.
This report, in contrast, focuses solely on data centers – their consumption, their location, their national
footprints, their design, and the considerations that businesses, governments, other organizations, and
investors should take into account when planning new data center facilities and hubs.
The Digital Economy Report, Data Center Report, and other IDCA reports are a product of IDCA’s global
research team, with a presence in each of the world’s regions. IDCA’s research process scans a number
of publicly available reports from organizations such as the International Energy Agency, World Bank,
United Nations, and International Telecommunications, as well as agencies within the United States, EU,
and numeros additional governmental entities.
IDCA also receives private feedback from specific government sources globally, from major data center
and cloud-computing operators, from developers, from investors, and from internal research.

6

Data Center Report (2026)

02

Data Center
Overview

7

Data Center Report (2026)

Data Center
Overview
Data centers have a global footprint of 67.7GW. This is a growth of 36 percent over the past two years.
Data centers now consume 2 percent of the world’s electricity, up from 1.7 percent in 2024 and 1.9
percent in mid-year 2025.
The US is by far the world’s largest data center location, with 43 percent of global consumption.
Data centers consume 29.2GW of electricity in the US, and now consume 6 percent of the nation’s
electricity.
The world’s other Top Five data center consumers are:
•
China, at 8.5GW, consuming 0.8 percent of nation’s electricity.
•
Germany, at 5.5GW, consuming 9.5 percent of the nation’s electricity.
•
UK at 2.0GW, consuming 5.8 percent of the nation’s electricity.
•
Japan at 1.7GW, consuming 1.5 percent of the nation’s electricity.
IDCA’s data for the US and several other countries are higher than some traditional estimates because of
the presence of small, room-sized data centers in use by SMEs that must be counted. These facilities are
numerous and inefficient compared to the large, building-sized facilities and campuses.
The continued use of smaller data centers by Mittelstand (family-owned mid-sized) companies in
Germany increases that nation’s estimate when compared to some other results as well. Similar
considerations apply throughout a variety of nations in IDCA’s analysis.
Additionally, IDCA research finds that as much as 13 percent of data center consumption in the United
States comes from unused, “zombie” cloud containers and services. This wasted consumption totals in
excess of 3GW, comparable to the energy produced by three nuclear reactors. This sort of inefficiency is
presumed to be apparent throughout the world, with inefficiencies increasing as the percentage of cloud
computing rises.
IDCA’s China analysis, on the other hand, produces data that shows a smaller footprint than some
traditional estimates. Neither China’s government nor its major vendors or utilities are transparent in
providing energy-use statistics. There is substantial unused capacity in China, and diverse global opinion
of how much data center consumption exists. IDCA has revised its China estimate upwards by a couple
of gigawatts when compared to analyses in 2025, and continues to seek optimal reporting of the nation’s
data center footprint.
China is an obvious sleeping giant within the world’s data center sphere. IDCA’s research shows the
nation still devotes less than 1 percent of its energy grid to data centers. The nation now produces almost
twice as much electricity overall as the United States, so has the potential to become a truly daunting
consumer of data center services.

8

Data Center Report (2026)

03

Regional Usage and
Disparities

9

Data Center Report (2026)

Regional Usage
and Disparities
With the above advisories in mind, IDCA shows a regional breakdown of data center usage as shown
below.

FIGURE 1.

Regional Breakdown of Data Center Footprint

46%

America = 31.2 GW

27%

Europe = 18.5 GW

1%

Africa = 0.52 GW

25%

Asia Pacific = 16.7 GW

1%

Middle East = 0.86 GW

Source: IDCA

The figures above reflect a continuing, massive disparity in data center usage throughout the world. IDCA
finds a difference of as much as 100,000X in the density of server usage – that is, the per capita presence
of data servers and data centers varies by as much as 100,000 times.

10

Data Center Report (2026)

Data Server Density

Log Scale

FIGURE 2.

Source: IDCA

Nations

Note: This chart is plotted on a log10 scale. Each horizontal unit increase denotes a 10X increase
in density. The five-unit disparity between the US (to the right of the chart) and least-developed
infrastructures (on the left) thus represents a gap of 100,000 times in the number of servers per
population.
The above disparity is largely a function of another disparity, that of the world’s electricity grids, which
vary 100X in their respective strength. This large disparity continues to exist at the same time that data
centers and related digital infrastructure are consuming and increasing proportion of those grids.

FIGURE 3.

Disparity of National Electricity Grids

Watts per Person

3,000

2,000

1,000

0

Source: IDCA
Research

Nations

11

Data Center Report (2026)

Data center consumption can also be viewed with respect to the amount of a nation’s electricity
it consumes. As noted above, the world as a whole has passed the 2-percent barrier in electricity
consumption by its data centers.
This average is not troubling in and of itself; however, it masks a very wide disparity of electricity use from
nation to nation, and obscures the very real constraints being experienced by a variety of nations across
income tiers.

FIGURE 4.

Data Center Consumption
30,000

MW

20,000

10,000

Source: IDCA
Research

0

Nations

On the one hand, data centers in Singapore and the European nations of Netherlands, Germany, and
Switzerland have exceeded the 9-percent consumption level. Data center consumption is provoking
political and societal angst in those nations. It is also doing so in a few countries that are approaching this
level in other European nations, including Ireland, Denmark, Lithuania, Estonia, and the UK.
The situation is mitigated somewhat in Singapore by strong data center development in the border
regions of Johor, Malaysia and Batam, Indonesia. But there is no such immediate relief in Europe. Over
the longer term, the large nation of France and smaller nations such as Slovakia and Slovenia, all of which
have very strong electricity grids driven by nuclear energy, may serve to reduce some constraints. But
this process would be a political process and presumably take time.
In the US, which has now reached the 6-percent level, community pushback over data center
consumption has been seen in several regions. Data center developers in Northern Virginia, many parts
of the Midwest, Texas, and California are finding multi-year delays in the ability to provision power for new
data centers.

12

Data Center Report (2026)

On the other hand, the lack of sufficient energy to meet basic needs throttles data center plans
throughout the developing world. IDCA finds that more than 70 countries devote less than 0.1% of their
power to data centers, with more than 30 countries devoting less than 0.01% to data centers.
Societal improvement in the 21st century cannot occur without a healthy digital infrastructure, and data
centers are the obvious foundation of that infrastructure. Plans by some developers to ameliorate the
situation in developing countries by providing their own power often involve the use of fossil fuels, and
surely do not represent a long-term development view.

Data Center Consumption (log10)

Log Scale

FIGURE 5.

Source: IDCA
Research

Nations

Data Center Consumption and Expansion
IDCA has analyzed each of the world’s nations with respect to its current data center consumption and
its potential for expansion. The analysis involves the use of an optimized model, in which Socioeconomic
conditions are ideal and data centers consume 6.25% of an electricity grid that is strong and powered
95% by renewable energy.
The optimized model takes into account the challenges facing developed nations – where energy use by
data centers is straining grids – and developing nations, where current grids are insufficient to meet basic
needs, let alone aggressive data center buildouts.

13

Data Center Report (2026)

04

Energy and
Water Resources

14

Data Center Report (2026)

Energy
IDCA advocates the use of sustainable energy for development of new data center facilities and hubs.
Sustainable energy includes the renewable sources of hydroelectric, wind, and solar power. It also
includes the use of geothermal energy where it’s present, as well as the use of biomass. Green hydrogen
represents another renewable resource, one which may be developed more fully in future years. Finally,
nuclear energy is included as a sustainable source of energy. A full review of the world’s current use of
sustainable energy is found in the upcoming IDCA Energy Usage Report.
The following figure provides an overview of global energy use and its consumption by data centers.

FIGURE 7.

World’s Top 10 Data Center Grids (TWh)

Source: IDCA
Research

15

Data Center Report (2026)

